# New Project

``` shell
$ cargo new microrust-start
     Created binary (application) `microrust-start` project
$ cd microrust-start
Cargo.toml  src
```

This has created a binary crate.

Now we could `$ cargo build` this, and even `$ cargo run` it,
but everything is being compiled for, and run on, your computer.

## Targets

The micro:bit has a different architecture than your computer,
so the first step will be to cross compile for the micro:bit's architecture.
If you were to do an internet search, you would find a [platform support list for Rust][platforms].
Looking into this page, you will find the micro:bit's nRF51822 Cortex-M0 microprocessor:

> `thumbv6m-none-eabi  [*]  [ ]  [ ]  Bare Cortex-M0, M0+, M1`

"thumbv6m-none-eabi" is known a a target triple. Note what the star represents:

> These are bare-metal microcontroller targets that only have access to the core library, not std.

To install this target:

``` console
$ rustup target add thumbv6m-none-eabi
```

## Build 1

Now how should we use this? Well, if you were to take a look at `$ cargo build -h`, you would try:

``` shell
$ cargo build --target thumbv6m-none-eabi
```

``` shell
error[E0463]: can't find crate for `std`
  |
  = note: the `thumbv6m-none-eabi` target may not be installed

error: aborting due to previous error

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0463`.
error: Could not compile `microrust-start`.

To learn more, run the command again with --verbose.
```

The help note is rather unhelpful because we just installed that target.
We also just noted that the thumbv6m-none-eabi target does not include std,
only the core crate, which is has a platform independent subset of the std features.
Why is it still looking for the std crate when we build?

### `no_std`

It turns out, rust will always look for the std crate unless explicitly disabled,
so we will add the no_std attribute

`src/main.rs`
``` rust
#![no_std]

fn main() {
    println!("Hello, world!");
}
```

## Build 2

``` shell
$ cargo build --target thumbv6m-none-eabi
error: cannot find macro `println!` in this scope
 --> src/main.rs:4:5
  |
4 |     println!("Hello, world!");
  |     ^^^^^^^
```

`println` is a macro found in the std crate.
We don't need it at the moment, so we can remove it and try to build again.

## Build 3

``` shell
$ cargo build --target thumbv6m-none-eabi
error: `#[panic_handler]` function required, but not found
```

This error, is because rustc required a panic handler to be implemented.

### `panic_impl`

We could try and implement the panic macro ourselves,
but it's easier and more portable to use a crate that does it for us.

If we look on [crates.io for the panic-impl keyword][panic] we will find some examples.
Let us pic the simplest one, and add it to our Cargo.toml.
If you have forgotten how to do this, try looking at [the cargo book][cargo].

[platforms]: https://forge.rust-lang.org/platform-support.html
[panic]: https://crates.io/keywords/panic-impl
[cargo]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/cargo/

`Cargo.toml`
``` toml
{{#include Cargo.toml:5:6}}
```

`src/main.rs`
``` rust
#![no_std]

extern crate panic_halt;

fn main() {
}
```

## Build 4

``` shell
$ cargo build --target thumbv6m-none-eabi
error: requires `start` lang_item
```

### `no_main`

In the normal command line rust binaries you would be used to making,
executing the binary usually has the operating system start by executing the C runtime library (crt0).
This in turn invokes the Rust runtime, as marked by the `start` language item,
which in turn invokes the main function.

Having enabled `no_std`, as we are targeting on a microcontroller,
neither the crt0 nor the rust runtime are available,
so even implementing `start` would not help us.
We need to replace the operating system entry point.

You could for example name a function after the default entry point,
which for linux is `_start`, and start that way.
Note, you would also need to disable [name mangling][nm]:

``` rust
#![no_std]
#![no_main]

#[no_mangle]
pub extern "C" fn _start() -> ! {
    loop {}
}
```

[nm]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Name_mangling

This is the end of the road for trying to get this to work on our own.
At this point we need the help of a board-specific support crate and a few cargo tweaks to get this working.

## microbit crate

Let us add a dependency on the board crate for the micro:bit.

``` toml
{{#include Cargo.toml:5:7}}
```

The microbit crate has 2 notable dependencies:

### `embedded-hal`

This crate is a HAL implementation crate, where HAL stands for *hardware abstraction layer*.
As rust becomes more and more popular in embedded development,
it is desireable to have as little hardware specific implementation as possible.

For this reason, the `embedded-hal` crate contains a range of hardware abstraction traits which can
be implemented by board specific crates.

### `cortex-m-rt`

This crate implements the minimal startup / runtime for Cortex-M microcontrollers.
Among other things this crate provides:
 - the `#[entry]` attribute, to define the entry point of the program.
 - a definition of the hard fault handler
 - a definition of the default exception handler

This crate requires:
 - a definition of the specific microcontroller's memory layout as a memory.x file.
   fortunately this is usually provided by the board support crates

To use the `#[entry]` attribute, we will need to add this as a dependency.

For more detailed information,
you can use the helpful [cortex-m-quickstart crate][qs] and [its documentation][doc].

[qs]: https://docs.rs/crate/cortex-m-quickstart
[doc]: https://docs.rs/cortex-m-quickstart

## cargo config

Before we go any further,
we are going to tweak the cargo's configuration by editing `microrust-start/.cargo/config`.
For more information, you can read [the documentation here][cargoconfig].

[cargoconfig]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/config.html

### `.cargo/config`

``` toml
{{#include ../../.cargo/config}}
```

### arm-none-eabi-gdb

This is a version of gdb (the GNU debugger) for the ARM EABI (embedded application binary interface).
It will allow us to debug the code running on our micro:bit, from your computer.

### Build target

Now, all you need to do is run `$ cargo build`,
and cargo will automatically add `--target thumbv6m-none-eabi`.

## Build 5

### `Cargo.toml`
``` toml
{{#include Cargo.toml:5:8}}
```

### `src/main.rs`

``` rust
#![no_std]
#![no_main]

extern crate panic_halt;

use cortex_m_rt::entry;

#[entry]
fn main() {
}
```

``` shell
$ cargo build
```

``` shell
error: custom attribute panicked
 --> src/main.rs:7:1
  |
7 | #[entry]
  | ^^^^^^^^
  |
  = help: message: `#[entry]` function must have signature `[unsafe] fn() -> !`
```

## `!` return type

A little known rust feature, so I will forgive you if you do not know what this means.
A return type of `!` means that the function cannot return.
An easy way to implement this is to use an infinite loop.

### `src/main.rs`

``` rust
#![no_std]
#![no_main]

extern crate panic_halt;

use cortex_m_rt::entry;

#[entry]
fn main() -> ! {
    loop {}
}
```

## Build 6

If you try building now, you should finally be greeted with `Finished`!

``` shell
$ cargo build
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.04s
```

## Build Complete

As a sanity check, let's verify that the produced executable is actually an ARM binary:

``` shell
$ file target/thumbv6m-none-eabi/debug/microrust-start
target/thumbv6m-none-eabi/debug/microrust-start: ELF 32-bit LSB executable, ARM, EABI5 version 1 (SYSV), statically linked, with debug_info, not stripped
                                                                            ^^^  ^^^^^
```
