# Serial Theory

The micro:bit core crate implements the embedded_hal::serial::Write and embedded_hal::serial::Read traits for the tx and rx pins respectively.

## `writeln!` and Carriage Return

In the introduction page on serial communication, I brushed over this:

``` rust
// Write string with newline and carriage return
let _ = write!(tx, "serial test\r\n");
```

A naïve assumption would be to try the seemingly more correct `writeln!` macro:

``` rust
// Write string with newline and carriage return
let _ = writeln!(tx, "serial test");
```

This will usually fail to do what is intended,
as multiple writes will only print one line in PuTTY,
and produce the following in minicom:

```
serial test
           serial test
                      serial test
                                 serial test
```

Your choices are to either configure minicom and PuTTY appropriately or use `write!` with `\r\n`.

### Control Characters

The control characters operate based on a print head, as used in [teleprinters][tty].

`\r` - Carriage Return - The print head is moves left to the start of the line.
`\n` - Line Feed - The print head moves down once to a new line.

[tty]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teleprinter

### `writeln!` macro

The `writeln!` macro should append a new line,
but he [documentation for core::writeln][doc] says:

> On all platforms, the newline is the LINE FEED character (\n/U+000A) alone (no additional CARRIAGE RETURN (\r/U+000D).

[doc]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/macro.writeln.html

### minicom

CTRL-A + Z will tell you that CTRL-A + U will add a carriage return.
This will add a carriage return to a received `\n`

### PuTTY

In PuTTY, you can enable enable `Implicit LF in every CR` under Terminal options.

## Blocking

Behind the scenes, `embedded_hal::serial` uses the nb crate to allow for blocking and non-blocking operation.
This is implemented in embedded_hal crates by returning nb::Error::WouldBlock
when a read or write action cannot be performed immediately.
In this chapter, we will only be using read and write as simple blocking calls.

### `block!`

The `block!` macro provided by the crate continuously calls the expression
contained until it no longer returns Error::WouldBlock.

## Tx - `embedded_hal::serial::Write` or `core::fmt::Write`

The `write!` and `writeln!` macros call `write_str` of the `core::fmt::Write` trait which is implemented for Tx.
`write_str` is implemented as a blocking call to `write` of the `embedded_hal::serial::Write` trait.

This means `write!(tx, "a")` is equivalent to `block!(tx.write(b'a'))`.
